Inactivated Vaccines Complete (#1045)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines.md

Past research on inactivated coronavirus vaccines has predominantly focused on SARS-CoV and to a lesser extent MERS-CoV.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that inactivated whole-virus SARS-CoV vaccines tend to elicit immune responses _in vivo_.  
These vaccines can generate considerable neutralizing antibodies titres at similar concentrations to those evoked by recombinant protein vaccines[@doi:10.1002/rmv.492;@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2007.03.025]. 
Studies in ferrets and non-human primates have demonstrated that inactivated whole virus vaccines can offer protection against infection due to neutralizing antibody and SARS-CoV-specific T cell responses [@doi:10.1093/intimm/dxh143].
However, several attempts to develop both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV inactivated vaccines have been hindered by incidences of vaccine-associated disease enhancement (VADE) in preclinical studies [@doi:10.1038/s41579-020-00462-y].
In one example of a study in macaques, an inactivated SARS-CoV vaccine induced even more severe lung damage due to an enhanced immune reaction @doi:10.1021/acsinfecdis.6b00006].

> Evidence of lung immunopathology due to VADE in response to MERS-CoV inactivated vaccines has also been observed in independent studies in mice [@doi:10.1080/21645515.2016.1177688; 10.1128/mBio.00554-20].

Author: Yes agreed for both.

The exact mechanisms responsible for VADE are still elusive due to the specificity of the virus host interactions involved, but VADE is the subject of investigation in preclinical SARS-CoV-2 vaccine studies to ensure the safety of any potential vaccines that may reach phase I trials and beyond [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-020-00462-y].

One prominent inactivated whole-virus vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 has been developed by Sinovac, a Beijing-based biopharmaceutical company. 
Their CoronaVac vaccine uses a β-propiolactone-inactivated whole virus produced using vero cells coupled with the addition of an aluminum adjuvant [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.585354] and is the subject of numerous clinical trials.
Phase I and II clinical trials indicated a strong immunogenic response in animal models and the development of neutralizing antibodies in human participants [@doi:10/fx8z; @doi:10.1126/science.abc1932; @doi:10/fpcx].

> Safety analysis of the vaccine during the phase II trial revealed that most adverse reactions were either mild (grade 1) or moderate (grade 2) in severity. The most common symptom was pain at the injection site (9%) and fever (3%), and only 2% (n=7) of participants reported severe adverse events, though these were determined to be unrelated to the vaccine. 

Author: Will catch this tomorrow

> Safety analysis of the vaccine during the phase II trial revealed that most adverse reactions were either mild (grade 1) or moderate (grade 2) in severity. The most common symptom was pain at the injection site (9%) and fever (3%), and only 2% (n=7) of participants reported severe adverse events, though these were determined to be unrelated to the vaccine. 

Author: So actually those data came from this reference @doi:10/fx8z - but I didn't specifiy that it was the elderly cohort. So either we generalize this to the entire population and look at the lancet paper for the % fever instead, or report both general population and elderly symptoms. What do you think?

> Safety analysis of the vaccine during the phase II trial revealed that most adverse reactions were either mild (grade 1) or moderate (grade 2) in severity. The most common symptom was pain at the injection site (9%) and fever (3%), and only 2% (n=7) of participants reported severe adverse events, though these were determined to be unrelated to the vaccine. 

Reviewer: I added a sentence above -- does that work? My main goal was to dodge having to get into all the subtle distinctions among groups, since overall the patterns were so similar!

Phase III trials of CoronaVac began in Brazil, July 2020, which was followed by trial participant recruitment in Indonesia, Turkey, and Chile, and emergency use approval in China [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/health/sinovac-covid-19-vaccine.html].
Results of the two dose phase III trial (14-day prime boost) were initially made public via press release December 23^rd^ 2020, despite some halts due to reports of adverse reactions [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/health/sinovac-covid-19-vaccine.html]. 
CoronaVac demonstrated an efficacy of little over 50% in Brazil, which was contested by Turkish officials claiming an efficacy of 91.25%, but ultimately after multiple announcements, the efficacy debate was settled at over 50% [@url:https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-sinovac-brazil/brazil-institute-says-coronavac-efficacy-above-50-but-delays-full-results-idUSKBN28X2CR; @url:https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/25/health/turkey-brazil-sinovac-coronavirus-vaccine.html].
Since these announcements, several of the CoronaVac phase III trials have been published.

> An interim analysis of the phase III randomized placebo-controlled trials conducted in Turkey enrolling 10,214 participants (~2:1 vaccine:placebo) has indicated that CoronaVac has a vaccine efficacy of 83.5%, with minimal side effects reported [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01429-X].

Author: Pesky lancet references

An interim preprint analyses of the Chilean placebo-controlled trial indicated that specific IgG neutralizing antibodies against S1-RBD and a robust IFN-γ secreting T cell response was induced via immunization with CoronaVac with only minimal adverse reactions reported in 270 vaccinated individuals versus 164 people administered placebo [@doi:10.1101/2021.03.31.21254494].

> While the full phase III Chilean trial has yet to be published, a prospective national cohort study in Chile reported an adjusted estimated effectiveness of 66% for the prevention of COVID-19 with an estimated 90% and 87% prevention of hospitalization and death respectively [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2107715].

Author: I'm not 100% either. It looks right though!

CoronaVac was also well tolerated and induced humoral responses in phase I trials in children aged 3-17 years old, which will now be examined in phase II and III clinical trials [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00319-4].
Furthermore, CoronaVac appears to be suitable for use in immunocompromised patients such as those with autoimmune rheumatic diseases according to phase IV trials [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01469-5].
As of September 2021, CoronaVac trials are now also being held in the Philippines and Hong Kong, bringing the total number of registered phase III trials investigating the safety and efficacy of CoronaVac to 9, with emergency use approval in 40 countries [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/7/].

> Sinovac has reported that their platform now has the capacity to provide up to a billion doses for worldwide distribution [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#sinovac].

Author: They have a helpful index at the start of the tracker so it is very accessible.

However, concern has been raised about the efficacy of CoronaVac following reports that over 350 doctors became ill with COVID-19 in Indonesia despite being immunized with CoronaVac [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/22/business/economy/china-vaccines-covid-outbreak.html]. 

> A phase I/II clinical trial in an elderly cohort (adults ≥ 60 years old) in China has determined that by 6-8 months neutralizing antibody titres were detected below the seropositive cutoff [@doi:10.1101/2021.08.03.21261544].

Author: Sounds good, I forget symbols sometimes don't fair well.

However, the reduction of neutralizing antibodies was ameliorated by a booster dose administered 8 months after the second CoronaVac dose. 
Notably, the beta variant appears to be more resistant to neutralizing antibodies in sera from individuals immunized with Sinovac than the alpha variant or wildtype virus, indicating that emerging variants may be of concern [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022].  
It has been hypothesized that “waning immunity” may be responsible as one preprint has reported that 6 months post the 2nd vaccination, a booster dose of CoronaVac markedly increased geometric mean titres of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.23.21261026v1].
However, it should be noted that antibody titres may not be the only correlates of protective immunity as cell mediated immune responses may also be at play [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01432-4].
Studies are underway to determine if a booster immunization is required for CoronaVac, including a phase IV clinical trial in China [@clinicaltrials:NCT04962308]. 

> Indeed, Chinese [@url:https://medicalxpress.com/news/2021-08-china-mixed-vaccine-trial-delta.html] and Chilean [@clinicaltrails:NCT04992182] researchers have opted to investigate different vaccine options for a booster dose to be administered to individuals who have already received two doses of CoronaVac. 

Author: Different vaccine options refers to a combination with Pfizer, Astra Zen etc. There are actually a few trials registered, but for brevity I just said vaccine options. Should we tidy it up, to make it clearer what is meant here?

> Indeed, Chinese [@url:https://medicalxpress.com/news/2021-08-china-mixed-vaccine-trial-delta.html] and Chilean [@clinicaltrails:NCT04992182] researchers have opted to investigate different vaccine options for a booster dose to be administered to individuals who have already received two doses of CoronaVac. 

Reviewer: Maybe something like this?
```suggestion
Indeed, Chinese [@url:https://medicalxpress.com/news/2021-08-china-mixed-vaccine-trial-delta.html] and Chilean [@clinicaltrails:NCT04992182] researchers have opted to investigate options to administer different vaccines (e.g., an mRNA vaccine dose) as a booster dose to individuals who have already received two doses of CoronaVac. 
```

This was followed by a detailed preprint of the double-blind, randomized, controlled phase III trial that was made available in July 2021, with a final enrollment of 25,798 people (~1:1 vaccine:placebo) [@doi:10.1101/2021.06.30.21259439].
The vaccine was reported as well tolerated, with an overall vaccine efficacy of 77.8% for the prevention of COVID-19.
Efficacy against severe disease and asymptomatic infection was reported as 93.4% and 63.6% respectively. 
In agreement with previous studies demonstrating sera from individuals vaccinated with COVAXIN^®^ efficiently neutralized the alpha variant (B.1.1.7) and the delta variant (B.1.617.2) [@doi:10.1093/jtm/taab104; @doi:10.1093/jtm/taab051], the phase III trial reported a 65.2% efficacy against the delta variant (B.1.617.2) [@doi:10.1101/2021.06.30.21259439]. 
Indeed, another preprint determined that sera from individuals immunized with COVAXIN^®^ had effective neutralizing antibodies against the delta variant and the so-called delta plus variant (AY.1) [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.30.454511].

> It is not yet clear what level of protection COVAXIN^®^ can offer beyond the 6-8 months post the second vaccine, consequently discussions relating to the potential requirement of a booster immunization is being investigated [@url:https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/covaxin-booster-dose-what-is-it-what-does-govt-say-about-this-101625644184446.html].

Author: Yes correct, updated thank you.

It has been reported that Bharat Biotech will soon release its phase II and III pediatric trial results [@url:https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/bharat-biotech-to-submit-covaxin-kids-trials-data-to-dcgi-in-weeks-time/articleshow/86392325.cms].
However, the WHO approval of the COVAXIN^®^ has been delayed [@url:https://www.indiatoday.in/coronavirus-outbreak/video/who-emergency-approval-for-covaxin-delayed-till-october-5-1856178-2021-09-23].

Two inactivated vaccine candidates were also developed by the stated-owned China National Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. more commonly known as Sinopharm CNBG. 
The Beijing branch of the company developed the BBIBP-CorV (Vero cells) vaccine, whereas the Wuhan branch also developed an inactivated (Vero cells) vaccine. 
The BBIBP-CorV vaccine was developed using the HB02 strain of SARS-CoV-2 isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage samples of COVID-19 patients.
This strain was selected due to its optimal viral replication and yield generation.

> The viruses were purified, propagated using vero cells, isolated, and inactivated using β-propiolactone and adjuvanted with aluminium hydroxide [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.008].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The viruses were purified, propagated using Vero cells, isolated, and inactivated using &beta;-propiolactone and adjuvanted with aluminium hydroxide [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.008].
```

> Preclinical studies indicated that the BBIBP-CorV vaccine induced sufficient neutralizing antibody titers in mice,  and a prime-boost immunization scheme of 2 μg/dose was sufficient to protect rhesus macaques from disease [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.008].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preclinical studies indicated that the BBIBP-CorV vaccine induced sufficient neutralizing antibody titers in mice, and a prime-boost immunization scheme of 2 &mu;g/dose was sufficient to protect rhesus macaques from disease [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.008].
```

> A combined phase I/II RCT followed [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30831-8]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A combined phase I/II RCT followed [@doi:10/ghjkrf]. 
```

> In phase I, 192 participants were randomized with varying doses of 2 μg, 4 μg, or 8 μg/dose or a placebo, whereby they received their second dose 28 days later. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In phase I, 192 participants were randomized with varying doses of 2 &mu;g, 4 &mu;g, or 8 &mu;g/dose or a placebo, and they received the same as a second dose 28 days later. 
```

Approximately 29% of participants reported at least 1 adverse event that was mostly reported as fever and neutralizing antibody titres were reported for all doses. 

> In the phase II trial, 482 participants received either a single 8 μg dose or a double immunization of 4μg/dose was administered 14, 21, or 28 days post the prime dose (3:1, vaccine:placebo). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the phase II trial, 482 participants were enrolled (3:1, vaccine:placebo).
Participants in the vaccine condition received either a single 8 &mu;g dose or a double immunization of a 4 &mu;g/dose that was administered 14, 21, or 28 days post the prime dose.
Participants in the placebo condition received the placebo on one of the same four schedules.
```

> The vaccine appeared well-tolerated with 23% reporting at least one adverse reaction characterized as mild to moderate. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vaccine appeared well-tolerated, with 23% reporting at least one adverse reaction characterized as mild to moderate. 
```

> It was reported that all participants had a humoral immune response to the vaccines by day 42 and that the double immunization dosing regimen of 4 μg/dose achieved higher neutralizing antibody titres than a single dose of 8 μg or 4 μg on days 0 and 14. [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30831-8]. 

Author: Sounds good. I was cutting a lot of the detail out. Mostly because I thought much of it might end up in Appendix :D

Similar findings were reported in another phase I/II trial published by the same authors [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565].

> In July 2020, phase III trials begin in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and in Morocco and Peru a month later [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#sinopharm]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In July 2020, phase III trials begin in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and in Morocco and Peru a month later [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html]. 
```

China approved the vaccine for use shortly after and in May 2021 the WHO added the vaccine to their emergency use listing, citing a vaccine efficacy of 78.1% [@url:https://www.who.int/news/item/07-05-2021-who-lists-additional-covid-19-vaccine-for-emergency-use-and-issues-interim-policy-recommendations].
Notably, a preprint reported that antisera from 12 people immunized with BBINP-CorV exhibited neutralizing antibody capacity against the beta variant (B.1.351), wild type SARS-CoV-2 (NB02), and one of the original variants of SARS-CoV-2 (D614G) [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.01.429069].
Another preprint including sera from 282 participants used a surrogate neutralizing assay, a test that generally correlates with neutralizing antibodies, to determine that BBINP-CorV appears to induce neutralizing antibodies against the binding of the RBD of wild type SARS-CoV-2 and the alpha, beta, and delta variants to ACE2 [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.15.21260621].

> Indeed, a study in the NEJM showed that the alpha variant exhibited very little resistance to neutralization by sera of those immunized with BBINP-CorV, but the beta variant was more resistant to neutralization by almost a factor of 3 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, a study in _The New England Journal of Medicine_ showed that the alpha variant exhibited very little resistance to neutralization by sera of those immunized with BBINP-CorV, but the beta variant was more resistant to neutralization by almost a factor of 3 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022]. 
```

However, in May 2021, the UAE announced it would consider booster shots for all citizens who had been immunized with BBIP-CorV, which was shortly followed by a similar announcement in Bahrain. 

> By August 29^th^ 2021, the UAE mandated booster shots for all residents who had received BBIP-CorV [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#sinopharm].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By August 29^th^, 2021, the UAE mandated booster shots for all residents who had received BBIP-CorV [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html].
```

A preprint study of healthcare workers in China has since indicated that a booster shot of BBIP-CorV elevates B cell and T cell responses and increases neutralizing antibody titres [@doi:10.1101/2021.09.12.21263373].
In collaboration with Sinopharm, G42 in Abu Dhabi, UAE, has become the first Arab country to manufacture a COVID-19 vaccine. 

> Their Hayat-Vax vaccine is identical to the Sinopharm-Beijing Institute vaccine and is now also approved for use in the Philippines and vietnam [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#sinopharm; @url:https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/emea/uae-first-country-arab-world-begin-manufacturing-covid-19-vaccine].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Their Hayat-Vax vaccine is identical to the Sinopharm-Beijing Institute vaccine and is now also approved for use in the Philippines and Vietnam [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html; @url:https://www.mobihealthnews.com/news/emea/uae-first-country-arab-world-begin-manufacturing-covid-19-vaccine].
```

> The Sinopharm-Beijing Institute vaccines is approved for emergency use in over 50 countris and has been fully approved for use in Bahrain, China, and the UAE [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#sinopharm].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sinopharm-Beijing Institute vaccine is approved for emergency use in over 50 countries and has been fully approved for use in Bahrain, China, and the UAE [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html].
```

Sinopharm Wuhan Institute also developed their SARS-CoV-2 inactivated vaccine using the WIV04 strain isolated from a patient at the Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan, China [@doi:10.1038/s41541-021-00292-w]. 

> This vaccine was also passaged in Vero cells, inactivated using β-propiolactone, and was adjuvanted with aluminum hydroxide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This vaccine was also passaged in Vero cells, inactivated using &beta;-propiolactone, and was adjuvanted with aluminum hydroxide. 
```

> This vaccine is administered intramuscularly using 5 μg of virus per dose. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This vaccine is administered intramuscularly using 5 &mu;g of virus per dose.
```

> However, there seems to be a lack of preclinical data available publically to support the evidence for the use of this vaccine. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preclinical data providing supporting evidence for the use of this vaccine is not available publically. 
```

However, phase I/II trials were initiated, which reported on varying dosing and prime-boost regimens. 

> Generally, the inactivated vaccine was reported as well tolerated and neutralizing antibodies were detected in all groups 14 days after the final dose in the phase I part of the trial [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, the inactivated vaccine was reported to be well tolerated, and neutralizing antibodies were detected in all groups 14 days after the final dose in the phase I part of the trial [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 
```

> Similar findings were reported in the Interim phase II data and the authors noted that no evidence of VADE was detected using this vaccine  [10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar findings were reported in the Interim phase II data, and the authors noted that no evidence of VADE was detected using this vaccine [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 
```

Author: few reference mistakes, apologies!

In phase III trials the WIV04 vaccine achieved an efficacy of 72.8% and was well tolerated. 

> Approximately 40-45% of individuals reported mild to moderate side effects 7 days post immunization and 0.5% of severe adverse events were reported [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Approximately 40-45% of individuals reported mild to moderate side effects 7 days post immunization, and only 0.5% reported severe adverse events, a rate similar to that seen for the other conditions [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565]. 
```

> A trial of the WIV04 vaccine in Peru was briefly paused due to safety concerns in relation to neurological symptoms [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/12/16/world/covid-19-coronavirus#the-clinical-trials-of-a-chinese-vaccine-resume-in-peru-after-a-volunteers-illness-is-deemed-unrelated], but this was later deemed unrelated to the vaccine and the trial continues [@clinicaltrials:nct04612972]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A trial of the WIV04 vaccine in Peru was briefly paused due to safety concerns in relation to neurological symptoms [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/12/16/world/covid-19-coronavirus#the-clinical-trials-of-a-chinese-vaccine-resume-in-peru-after-a-volunteers-illness-is-deemed-unrelated], but this was later deemed unrelated to the vaccine, and the trial continued [@clinicaltrials:nct04612972]. 
```

> The Sinopharm-Wuhan vaccine has been approved by China and the Philippines [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/16/], limited distribution was shared with the UAE [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html#wuhan], but has not been approved elsewhere as most have favoured the BBIBP-CorV Sinopharm Beijing vaccine due to the slightly higher efficacy [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sinopharm-Wuhan vaccine has been approved by China and the Philippines [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/16].
Limited distribution was shared with the UAE [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html], but has not been approved elsewhere, as most governments have favored the BBIBP-CorV Sinopharm Beijing vaccine due to its slightly higher efficacy [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565].
```

It has, however, been noted that different inactivation techniques and combinations of these techniques can lead to different immune responses in preclinical studies [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.602256; @doi:10.1002/rmv.492]. 
Therefore, optimization of these strategies may be necessary in preclinical studies prior to human trials. 

Overall, these vaccines are able to mimic the key properties of the virus that stimulate a robust immune response, but the risk of adverse reactions is reduced because the virus is inactivated and thus unable to replicate.
Inactivated vaccines are generally considered the fastest to generate once the pathogenic virus has been isolated and can be passaged in cell culture [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.602256]. 
However, this was not the case for the COVID-19 pandemic due to the advent of mRNA technologies and due to caution surrounding a novel coronavirus. 

Past research on inactivated coronavirus vaccines has predominantly focused on SARS-CoV-1 and to a lesser extent MERS-CoV.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that inactivated whole-virus SARS-CoV vaccines tend to elicit immune responses _in vivo_.  

> These vaccines can generate considerable neutralizing antibody titers at similar concentrations to those evoked by recombinant protein vaccines [@doi:10.1002/rmv.492;@doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2007.03.025]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These vaccines can generate considerable neutralizing antibody titers at similar concentrations to those evoked by recombinant protein vaccines [@doi:10.1002/rmv.492; @doi:10.1016/j.virusres.2007.03.025]. 
```

Sinovac has reported that their platform now has the capacity to provide up to a billion doses for worldwide distribution [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html].

However, concern has been raised about the efficacy of CoronaVac following reports that over 350 doctors became ill with COVID-19 in Indonesia despite being immunized with CoronaVac [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/2021/06/22/business/economy/china-vaccines-covid-outbreak.html]. 
A phase I/II clinical trial in an elderly cohort (adults 60 years and older) in China has determined that by 6 to 8 months following the second dose, neutralizing antibody titers were detected below the seropositive cutoff [@doi:10.1101/2021.08.03.21261544].
However, the reduction of neutralizing antibodies was ameliorated by a booster dose administered 8 months after the second CoronaVac dose. 
Notably, the beta variant appears to be more resistant to neutralizing antibodies in sera from individuals immunized with Sinovac than the alpha variant or wildtype virus, indicating that emerging variants may be of concern [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022].  

> It has been hypothesized that “waning immunity” may be responsible, as one preprint has reported that 6 months after the second vaccination, a booster dose of CoronaVac markedly increased geometric mean titers of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.23.21261026v1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has been hypothesized that “waning immunity” may be responsible, as one preprint has reported that 6 months after the second vaccination, a booster dose of CoronaVac markedly increased geometric mean titers of SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.23.21261026].
```

Similar findings were reported in another phase I/II trial published by the same authors [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565].

In July 2020, phase III trials begin in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and in Morocco and Peru a month later [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html]. 
Sinopharm affiliates in the UAE in early December 2020 claimed the vaccine had 86% efficacy, which was later at odds with a Sinopharm Beijing affiliate that stated that the BBIBP-CorV vaccine had a 79.34% efficacy later that same month [https://www.reuters.com/article/health-coronavirus-china-vaccine-int-idUSKBN2940CA].
China approved the vaccine for use shortly after and in May 2021 the WHO added the vaccine to their emergency use listing, citing a vaccine efficacy of 78.1% [@url:https://www.who.int/news/item/07-05-2021-who-lists-additional-covid-19-vaccine-for-emergency-use-and-issues-interim-policy-recommendations].

> Notably, a preprint reported that antisera from 12 people immunized with BBINP-CorV exhibited neutralizing antibody capacity against the beta variant (B.1.351), wild type SARS-CoV-2 (NB02), and one of the original variants of SARS-CoV-2 (D614G) [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.01.429069].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, a preprint reported that antisera from 12 people immunized with BBIBP-CorV exhibited neutralizing antibody capacity against the beta variant (B.1.351), wild type SARS-CoV-2 (NB02), and one of the original variants of SARS-CoV-2 (D614G) [@doi:10.1101/2021.02.01.429069].
```

> Another preprint including sera from 282 participants used a surrogate neutralizing assay, a test that generally correlates with neutralizing antibodies, to determine that BBINP-CorV appears to induce neutralizing antibodies against the binding of the RBD of wild type SARS-CoV-2 and the alpha, beta, and delta variants to ACE2 [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.15.21260621].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another preprint including sera from 282 participants used a surrogate neutralizing assay, a test that generally correlates with neutralizing antibodies, to determine that BBIBP-CorV appears to induce neutralizing antibodies against the binding of the RBD of wild type SARS-CoV-2 and the alpha, beta, and delta variants to ACE2 [@doi:10.1101/2021.07.15.21260621].
```
I'm wondering if this is a typo and it's meant to be BBIBP?

Author: Good catch!

> Indeed, a study in _The New England Journal of Medicine_ showed that the alpha variant exhibited very little resistance to neutralization by sera of those immunized with BBINP-CorV, but the beta variant was more resistant to neutralization by almost a factor of 3 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, a study in _The New England Journal of Medicine_ showed that the alpha variant exhibited very little resistance to neutralization by sera of those immunized with BBIBP-CorV, but the beta variant was more resistant to neutralization by almost a factor of 3 [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2103022]. 
```

> However, in May 2021, the UAE announced it would consider booster shots for all citizens who had been immunized with BBIP-CorV, which was shortly followed by a similar announcement in Bahrain. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in May 2021, the UAE announced it would consider booster shots for all citizens who had been immunized with BBIP-CorV, which was shortly followed by a similar announcement in Bahrain. 
```
Is BBIP correct or its it supposed to be BBIBP? (it's also used on the next few lines!)

Author: Corrected to BBIBP

> By August 29^th^, 2021, the UAE mandated booster shots for all residents who had received BBIP-CorV [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By August 29^th^, 2021, the UAE mandated booster shots for all residents who had received BBIBP-CorV [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-vaccine-tracker.html].
```

> A preprint study of healthcare workers in China has since indicated that a booster shot of BBIP-CorV elevates B cell and T cell responses and increases neutralizing antibody titers [@doi:10.1101/2021.09.12.21263373].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A preprint study of healthcare workers in China has since indicated that a booster shot of BBIBP-CorV elevates B cell and T cell responses and increases neutralizing antibody titers [@doi:10.1101/2021.09.12.21263373].
```

This vaccine was also passaged in Vero cells, inactivated using &beta;-propiolactone, and was adjuvanted with aluminum hydroxide. 
This vaccine is administered intramuscularly using 5 &mu;g of virus per dose.
Preclinical data providing supporting evidence for the use of this vaccine is not available publically. 
However, phase I/II trials were initiated, which reported on varying dosing and prime-boost regimens. 
Generally, the inactivated vaccine was reported to be well tolerated, and neutralizing antibodies were detected in all groups 14 days after the final dose in the phase I part of the trial [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 
Similar findings were reported in the Interim phase II data, and the authors noted that no evidence of VADE was detected using this vaccine [@doi:10.1001/jama.2020.15543]. 
In phase III trials the WIV04 vaccine achieved an efficacy of 72.8% and was well tolerated. 
Approximately 40-45% of individuals reported mild to moderate side effects 7 days post immunization, and only 0.5% reported severe adverse events, a rate similar to that seen for the other conditions [@doi:10.1001/jama.2021.8565]. 

> A trial of the WIV04 vaccine in Peru was briefly paused due to safety concerns in relation to neurological symptoms [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/12/16/world/covid-19-coronavirus#the-clinical-trials-of-a-chinese-vaccine-resume-in-peru-after-a-volunteers-illness-is-deemed-unrelated], but this was later deemed unrelated to the vaccine, and the trial continued [@clinicaltrials:nct04612972]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A trial of the WIV04 vaccine in Peru was briefly paused due to safety concerns in relation to neurological symptoms [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/12/16/world/covid-19-coronavirus#the-clinical-trials-of-a-chinese-vaccine-resume-in-peru-after-a-volunteers-illness-is-deemed-unrelated], but this was later deemed unrelated to the vaccine, and the trial continued [@clinicaltrials:NCT04612972]. 
```
